okay I think we're good now so it looks
like we are able to screen share there
we go okay we back sorry about the
technical difficulties guys let's go
ahead and dive in okay I'm still just my
mind is boggled that like I do this
everyday and I set it up the same way
every day and sometimes it works and
sometimes it doesn't it's like if I
connect to reflector and then it like
goes into sleep mode it like can never
connect again no matter how many how
much we do that's okay we can lose
viewers okay so let's start with
emotions okay
so this is what we're talking about
today so we're gonna start off actually
by thinking a little bit about behavior
and how we work so a lot of times we're
gonna dip a little bit into mechanics of
mind so a lot of times we make decisions
right but then the question is what goes
into decisions so like what are the
components of decisions so sometimes
even if something is irrational it may
not eat just because something is is
rational doesn't mean that it is
actually that you do that thing so
you're even if you something is
rationally a good idea it doesn't
necessarily mean that you do it so what
are the three things that kind of go in
decision-making one is rational and
there are habits and other stuff that
we're not going to get to today but
these are essentially components of the
mind so even if you know something is
good rationally you may have an emotion
that keeps you from doing it so a good
example of this is social anxiety so
let's say that like in social anxiety
you know rationally you can say everyone
likes me because they're your friends
right so let's assume that you're going
out with your friends and then but your
emotions say no one likes me
[Music]
okay and the third thing that makes
decisions for you the third part of your
mind is your ego or sense of identity
but then this then you have this kind of
thought I am an unlikable person and so
these are I mean the other kind of
emotional thought is like another way to
think about this is this may not even be
a thought necessarily it's just you know
a sense of fear or worry so this this
could actually be an ego ego statement
as well the point here is that like
these are the three things that happen
right so you have like physical
sensations of anxiety you have kind of
just this emotional you have like a pit
in your stomach or you have sweaty palms
or things like that and so all three of
these things are in conflict and so a
big problem is that you know when I work
with people and technologies social
media gamers etc they say I know what I
need to do but I just can't do right you
know you need to study you know you need
to apply for a job so this is part of
set with the question is this is
insufficient to get you guys to do what
you need to do and so the question is
like what do we do about that right like
I can sit here and then like the problem
is that youth like when you think about
your problem solving strategy here you
focus on number one rationality number
two rationality and number three
rationality right number four maybe you
work on habit five willpower you can do
all kinds of stuff over here actually
but most of the arguing that you do with
yourself is in your head and
and is on an intellectual level but
that's kind of insufficient because the
problem actually is not here the problem
is here or here and we don't really get
trained to deal with these two things so
today what we're gonna talk about is
emotions okay
so question is if you're unable to do
what you want to chances are it's not
the rational that's holding you guys
back because in my experience most like
gamers and like you know people tend to
be smart it's not an issue of IQ it's an
issue of like not understanding that
there are things holding you back in
your mind that are irrational because if
it you know that those are those are
emotions so so then let's think about
you know why or why is it hard to deal
with emotions so why are emotions
hard to deal with so the first reason is
because most of us are Alexa thymic in
alexithymia is the inability to
determine your internal emotional state
so a lot of gamers that I talked to say
that they're in control of their
emotions they feel like they're in
control of their emotions and when I
kind of ask them like what do you mean
by that
and they'll say like okay so so give me
an example of being in control they're
saying like I can watch a sad movie and
I won't cry I can watch a scary movie
and I won't feel scared
I like tend to be you know like emotions
don't affect me I can go to the funeral
and like I'll be sad but I'm not gonna
be like crying like other people and so
what they mean by in control you're not
really in control of your emotions
you're just suppressing them and the
interesting thing about emotions is if
we look at the brain our emotions
essentially we can turn up the volume or
down the volume on our emotions
affects all emotions so if we look at
like gamers this is also why they don't
feel that positivity like they look at
other people and they're like wow that
person really has a zest for life I
don't have a zest for life I feel kind
of stuck I feel like a lack of
fulfillment and part of that is because
you know imagine there are different
like channels right so they're different
twitch channels you can watch but if
twitch is muted it doesn't matter what
kind of twitch channel you're watching
you're not gonna be able to hear what
you know what they're saying you're
gonna get you like just a fraction of
what other people are capable of feeling
because your emotions are just turned
all the way down if the question is why
do we suppress our emotions and or why
are our emotions suppressed so then the
question is why suppression there are a
couple reasons for this one is that it's
adaptive and protective so a lot of
gamers will have various things that
happen to them when they're young um
that that the emotions hurt and when
you're young unless you have someone who
can help you navigate those emotions
you're going to learn how to suppress
them especially through video games so
let's say go sample is you get bullied
you know you have abusive neglectful
parents is another good one or people
around you then even if you don't get
bullied and you don't want to have
abusive or neglectful parents you have
parents that talk about your potential
and how smart you are and then this
actually makes you feel what right it
makes you feel bad unless it makes you
feel good and the question is what what
what is this bad it makes you feel shame
makes you feel fear that you can't
live up to expectation and so then the
question is like when they tell you
you're such a smart kid so like if the
odd thing is that even parents can be
sort of like loving and kind it's just
love is not a substitute for like
emotional competence right they can be
supportive or do what they think is
supportive and it can still place a
burden on you this is why like we all
have kind of little emotional traumas or
psychological complexes or some scars
and it doesn't mean that our parents did
a bad job it just means that we weren't
taught how to deal with them like deal
with the what they did to us and what
they did to our psyche so if we think
about it like we don't want to feel this
so what we end up doing is all of this
results in suppression because if you
suppress then it goes away so how do we
suppress okay first is video games so
there are studies that show that when
you play a video game it does a couple
of interesting things there are there
the two parts of the brain that are sort
of govern emotional and especially a
negative emotional experience or the
amygdala and hippocampus okay
so when we're feeling bad these two
parts of our brain are like kind of lit
up and so these two parts of our brain
are lit up whenever we're feeling bad
and then when we play a video game
there's studies that show that the
activity in these regions actually end
up getting the activity goes down so
when we play video games these turn off
and when we spend a lot of time playing
video games we learn how to turn these
these things off and they they start to
turn off all the time
we also suppress the rest of our
emotions so we kind of get that
dopaminergic satisfaction from playing a
video game so it's kind of like
rewarding and addictive but it doesn't
make you feel happy or excited do you
guys get that so video games reward us
without necessarily like creating
positive emotion so there there are like
moments of positive emotion in video
games right like you can like win a
match of like let's say you're you're
down and League of Legends or something
and then you guys they could come back
and then you feel like excitement at the
end and there's there is somewhat of an
emotional rollercoaster when you play
those games there's also a lot of rage
in Tulsa City that bubbles up and if you
think about it like if you don't really
care about a game of League of Legends
like why is it that you feel so
frustrated or toxic or angry with your
teammates it's because you have this
gigantic pile of emotions that are like
that you've been suppressing for a while
and it starts to come out so if we
really look at video games what they
actually train us to do is suppress our
emotions
that's neurologically like what they do
to our brains they just turn off those
parts of our body and then what happens
is like if a brief a part of our body is
turned off if we shut off a part of our
brain we lose competence with that part
okay so let's think about this like good
examples of this or forgetting a
language other things are like you know
just skill decay in general like whether
it's like learning that forgetting to
play music or you know forgetting
certain information or knowledge and
remember the brain is an efficient organ
so if it's not using some thing it's
gonna like stop prioritizing it so over
time is
video games or other forms of like
social media or technology suppress our
emotions suppress our emotions suppress
our emotions then we like forget we
don't understand what we're feeling
another important part about suppression
is kind of cultural so there's a
cultural impact and what do I mean by
that and maybe actually if we think
about it what I should do is this take
this move it down here okay we're gonna
take this up here so this is a second so
why do we suppress because of a cultural
impact to so men are taught to suppress
most emotions right so if you think
about the traditional like guys locker
room right like we don't express shame
or fear we're basically taught to only
express one emotion which is anger and
so like you know when when when you get
rejected by a girl if you say like yeah
I'm if you tell your bros that you're
like yeah I'm afraid that I'm never
gonna be loved and that like no one will
ever love me like no dude says that
right when you get when you ask her girl
out she says no that's not what you say
because you don't even understand that
you feel that like you feel some sense
of badness and then you get pissed and
you're like yeah [ __ ] her you know like
and then your bros are like they're
completely fine and they get like toxic
and they're like yeah like she sucks
like forget about her man like you're
better than that like all this kind of
language but we don't talk about what
you actually feel so we suppress fear
shame you know all these kinds of other
emotions like we even suppress sadness
like you don't tell your friend like hey
yeah man I'm feeling like super sad
today you're you know what what we do is
we like so we detect these emotions
within each other we recognize them and
oftentimes men use physical language
to express emotion so we don't know like
we don't know these words these are like
questionable toss but physical language
were very familiar with like how did it
feel when she dumped you man felt like a
kick in the nuts you say that and then
all your you're like I friends are like
yeah man I know exactly what you mean
right when you saw her for the first
time how did she make you feel I felt
butterflies in my stomach right so
that's like a physical representation of
all kinds of emotions apprehension
excitement vulnerability right this is
one that especially men don't talk about
you feel vulnerable you feel exposed
there are all kinds of emotions that go
into this you just don't know what they
are and so this kind of like this leads
to a big problem because not only are
games reinforcing our brain to not
experience or understand emotion but
then we also have like all of these
physical sensations because the emotion
is gonna come out in some way so your
body is psychosomatic and what I mean by
that is that your mind and your body are
connected and so like physical thing
ental representations are gonna have
physical effects and physical effects
are gonna have mental representations
and what do I mean by that like if
you're sick mentally how it like if you
have the flu mentally how do you feel
you feel crappy right mentally you feel
crappy you don't feel interested in
things things aren't quite as fun like
you don't even like anger and
irritability and stuff like that is
gonna all kind of be suppressed and on
the flip side if you're mentally not
feeling well that's gonna manifest with
okay
where is where is the rest of my family
there's the family can you close the
door thanks I'm so
so what was I saying yeah so mentally
you're gonna have physical
representations too so if you feel
anxious like you have to if you have
worried thoughts in your head the other
day when we talked about anxiety we
didn't really talk about physical
anxiety but it's gonna have physical
senses sensations right yeah where my
teammates is right and so these two
things are intrinsically linked and men
tend to experience a lot of emotion
physically like if I asked someone what
emotions are you feeling right now
they're gonna say I don't know but if I
ask them physically what do you say
they're gonna they're gonna definitely
be able to say things like pit in my
stomach tightness in my chest
[Music]
etc and then oftentimes on stream or
after meditation I'll ask them what
happened to the pin in your stomach what
happened to the tightness in your chest
and people will feel better it'll feel
less so we're actually gonna hang on to
this we're gonna bring it down okay and
now we're gonna go to the next service
and then the question is how so the
first thing that we've got to do so
let's assume that all this is true right
so let's go back to this for a second
and remember that our goal here is to
make better decisions or not make better
decisions to implement better decisions
and so if we think about what's keeping
us from implementation it is actually
it's not that rationally we don't know
what to do it's that emotionally we're
not sure what to do or like our emotions
are controlling part of part of our
behavior so that's why this is important
so the first thing to understand is that
why is it hard for us to function
emotionally and that's because we're
LexA finding we literally like it's hard
to control something or deal with
something if you don't know what it is
or where it is so the first thing to
understand is that we're Alexa thymic
which means that we don't understand
what our emotions are and if we don't
understand what they are you can't do
anything about it because good diagnosis
precedes good treatment actually there
are some things you can do but it's it's
ineffective
it's not like a long-term strategy and
so why are we Alexis I make that has to
do with a lot of our brain and using
some technological tools that create
suppression and the more our brain gets
suppressed the more we become color
blind to our internal emotional state
we're also for the most part especially
men more so than women are culturally
like taught to not understand or express
their emotions so not only do we have
technology but we also have this
cultural impact and that results in our
our feelings of alexithymia so the
question is what do we do about it right
fine dr. K I accept everything you're
saying what do I do about alexithymia
[Music]
it's allergies not covet guys don't
worry so the first thing is to recognize
that you are feeling an emotion we're
not even going to try to define it yet
the first thing that you've got to do is
figure out oh there like it there are
emotions at play here okay there are
some things that you can do to clue
yourself in what that emotions are at
play and what are those things okay so
the first thing is physical sensations
[Music]
so let's say you're waiting for like a
job interview or you wake up one day and
you know that your parents are gonna
call and you feel stuff okay that's why
I've been hanging on all that for all
this time so the first thing is physical
sensations so if you start to feel
physical sensations understand that
there is an emotional equivalent so this
is a clue
that you're feeling something so then
you can go look for it right so we can
leverage our rational mind to
hypothesize what we could be feeling
okay the second thing that the second
clue is umbrella terms and what do I
mean by that we have ways of conveying
in general that we don't feel good
stressed frustrated overwhelmed and
unfortunately nowadays anxious a anxiety
has become a catch-all term for all
kinds of emotions now it's not even
necessarily worried and so a lot of
times since we don't have the resolution
to capture the emotion we're aware that
we feel stressed but like what does that
even mean like what does it mean to feel
stressed like what is the emotion that
you're experiencing when you're stressed
and there are all kinds of things there
could be like uncertainty around the
future there could be fear that you're
gonna fail you're you're gonna lose your
job there could be concern that people
are gonna ostracize you there are all
kinds of things right you could be
pissed off at someone you could be
ashamed about something like Oh
everyone's gonna find out that you're an
impostor all of these things like like
you say that you're stressed and then
you someone asks you how's work going
and you say work sucks sucks is another
good one right what does that mean like
what's bad about work what is the
negative emotion that work causes you to
experience is it a is it a sense that
you were being taken advantage of or is
it that you were victimized is it that
you feel powerless is it that you feel
hopeless there are all kinds of things
that that could make work suck but we
don't understand so that's the first
thing that we've got to do is recognize
when we're feeling emotion and these are
our clues so step one is recognize that
you're feeling an emotion
step two is try to diagnose that emotion
okay and so then what we do is we say
like okay we take something like stress
and then we're gonna hypothesize so you
can do something like you know you can
ask yourself okay about shame fear anger
sadness what else
hope or hopelessness feelings of power
or agency or powerlessness right any of
this stuff could be going on and then
like literally go down the list and then
ask yourself so I do this on stream and
you guys may grieve that's another good
one right so regret that there's another
good one there all kinds of yeah so so
and someone saying that frustration is a
lower form of anger I completely agree
so frustration is like mini anger and
then another one oh this is another
umbrella term embarrassment it's usually
shame right so we have like lighter
versions we've got the diet version of
shame which is embarrassment we've got
the diet version of anger which is
frustration and so like you if you're
feeling stressed out you just literally
you ask yourself are you feeling any of
these and you can like literally just go
through the list and then if that
doesn't work there's even another option
that you can do so this is one thing
that you can do if that doesn't work you
can ask yourself what would someone in
my situation feel and the crazy thing is
that we're way better at asking this
question okay and this has to do with us
being sort of more cognitively empathic
than emotionally empathic two kinds of
empathy cognitive empathy and emotional
empathy
emotional empathy is what we sort of
think of as regular empathy like you're
someone who has a lot of empathy but
then there's another kind of empathy
which is cognitive so it's not that you
actually feel what other people are
feeling it's that you can rationalize or
analyze what someone else would be
feeling so you can like sort of
analytically predict emotions but you
don't actually feel them and so if you
ask yourself what would someone else in
my situation feel like if someone was
applying for a promotion and they they
may not get it because there were two
other candidates who maybe are more
qualified how would they feel they feel
maybe a shame they feel hopeless they
feel powerless and so if you ask
yourself what someone else would be
feeling you can get like you can check
off a couple things oh maybe it's this
one maybe it's this one maybe it's this
one maybe they feel regret because they
could have worked harder earlier there
are all kinds of things okay
so then once you sort of figure out okay
like maybe I'm feeling shame maybe I'm
feeling hope maybe I'm feeling power
powerlessness then the question is how
do I deal with it okay so now the
question is like okay let's say you go
through this process and you understand
that you're Alexa thymic and you figure
out okay maybe this is what I'm feeling
how do we actually check this box so
that your decisions aren't as impacted
by your emotions so the short answer is
that you have to process it so I want
you guys to recognize that like in your
decision-making process
we have rational thoughts - emotions and
then let's say + - ego equals decision
right or not even decision maybe if
actually action is maybe better and so
what that means is that like you can
increase this variable as much as you
want to right but if this variable is
like you want to decrease this and then
your action will be what you want in the
case of negative emotions the opposite
is also true right we can have emotions
like head over heels in love
- rational thought + - ego equals action
so this is also true right so head over
heels and love is the emotion and then
the rational thought is person is not
good for me right we can think these
things - and this is absolutely a common
occurrence but my point is that these
two things are oftentimes opposed and
then sometimes they're not opposed right
and when they're not opposed then action
becomes very easy so when your your
rational mind and your emotional mind
are aligned if your ego is also aligned
or your identity's line then action
becomes easy and this is the thing that
I want you guys to understand like a big
part of what I advocate for so people
think that you need remember y'all
solution is this this is a crappy
solution in my opinion like sure habits
are good sure willpower is good but what
I'm saying is just make the decision
easier for yourself by reducing this
variable if you reduce the impact of
this or you reduce the impact of this
then your decision making process is
going to get way easier it's just gonna
like
don't need willpower if your emotions in
your rational thought are aligned so if
you digest your emotions like decisions
just start to become easy for you like
it's just easy I don't know how else to
describe it it's just easy
so for example when my kid walks in I
experience different emotions I
experience some amount of joy and I
experience some amount of frustration
and whether I let those emotions control
me or not depends on my awareness of
those emotions so if I just recognize
and I'm like okay you know like I'm
feeling a little bit annoyed and then
like that thing loses power over me okay
so how do we process it so the question
is how does this happen
how so the first thing awareness and
this is because awareness proceeds
control you cannot control that which
you are unaware of just think about that
for a second okay if you've ever had
dental work done and you've had your
mouth numbed up your control over the
numb of your mouth just goes out the
window like you can try to control it
you can sort of move your tongue around
but like your capacity to control it
properly and not bite your tongue if
your tongue is numb like you can sort of
roughly direct it but you lose all of
your fine like motor capability you lose
all of your precision so I want you guys
to realize that you're moving through
life without any kind of emotional like
control emotional precision or any
control like that is precise over your
emotions so your emotions are just
running amok within you and as your
emotions start to run amok and they're
just doing whatever the hell they want
you then the only solution that you know
how to do is just turn it off right it's
like if I can't control like what
direction like let's say I turn on a
garden hose and there's a lot of water
coming out of the garden hose the garden
hose is going all over the place and
this is how you feel like when you try
to ask a girl out or you go you apply
for a job or your parents ask you how
you're doing or whatever like there are
all kinds of situations that just turn
up the emotional knob and then there's a
garden hose that's like just flopping
all around getting everything wet and
the only solution you have is to turn
the water off you go and replay video
and so you're just like oh my god I
can't deal with this I can't deal with
this like I'm gonna go home
that's all you can do so you have to
become aware right you have to
understand where the garden hose is you
have to understand where you know when
the water is coming out and like just
think about this for a second how easy
is it to control the water out of a
garden hose if you're holding it with
three fingers right the amount of effort
that's required to actually control the
water flow out of a garden hose is
minimal provided you're actually holding
it in the right place right like does
that make sense to you guys it's like
it's actually quite easy you just need
precision and this kind of comes back to
this like I don't like it when people
use willpower because willpower is an
imprecise solution I don't know what the
I don't know what the analogies is with
the garden hose I'm just saying that
like controlling something once you're
aware of it and you understand how to
hold it properly becomes very very easy
and so that's what I really think you
guys should focus on so the first thing
is to become aware of as crazy as this
sounds this accounts for like do I
actually write out like honestly between
25 and 40 percent in my estimation just
being aware something accounts for 25 to
40 percent in some cases some believe
that this is sufficient for 100% I think
over time it is like right now when I
when I felt my emotions I just felt them
and then they went away oh you
acknowledge it and it's gone so once you
train yourself it can get close to a
hundred percent but let's start with
it's gonna at the beginning account for
25 to 40 percent and I know that's crazy
all you need to know is what the problem
is and you can think about that like you
know awareness precedes control is
another example of diagnosis precedes
treatment and I say this all the time
and I think it's a beautiful lesson to
learn from medicine is that it's hard to
treat a disease that you've been
properly diagnosed and so like diagnosis
is half the battle like treatment
afterward it becomes relatively easy if
you have a problem with your car and
you're just saying like yeah my car is
busted and then like you take it to a
mechanic in the car is like and then the
mechanic is like what's wrong with it
you're like yeah I don't know it's
busted
whereas if you say yeah I mean whatever
I drive I hear this clunky sound or it
makes this noise or one of the tires
seems way smaller than the others
you guys can clearly tell that like
awareness of the problem is very very
efficient at solving the problem the
second thing that you can do is work on
the body okay so what I mean by that is
we know we are physical sensations so
this is where you can do stuff
physically so I think this is why Yoga
is good so yoga improves anxiety
depression and by the way this is not
just because it's physical so this is a
mind-body practice so in clinical trials
yoga tends to outperform exercise so
exercise is great for anxiety and
depression but evidence suggests that
Yoga is superior in even some amounts of
trauma so I've worked with some people
who like will do sort of yoga informed
trauma programs and it seems to help a
lot so in addition to therapy and stuff
they add yoga and somehow like we don't
know exactly how it works but we do have
clinical evidence we have scientific
trials where that will take a hundred
people with anxiety and we'll have 50 of
them do yoga 50 of them do exercise and
50 of them do nothing and we'll compare
the results and what we'll find is that
exercise and yoga outperform nothing in
yoga performs outperforms exercise in
some studies so what we mean by that
it's like work on the body so they're
also meditative techniques that
specifically work on the body so I think
yoga is a good example of one but
another thing that I recommend people do
is that they breathe into the emotion
okay so like if you're feeling so we can
kind of do this very quickly okay so if
your feet whole months right
so if you're feeling
[Music]
if you're feeling a tightness in your
chest or a pit in your stomach or
constriction in your throat then all I
want you to do is just breathe into that
space so when you breathe in notice that
you can feel the breath in your body
like you can focus on the temperature
and you can kind of feel the cool air
kind of going down and into your body
and literally what I want you to do is
breathe in to the tightness in your
chest and then breathe out so it's
actually relatively simple you just
focus on that sensation with your
attention and then you breathe into it
and then you breathe out you breathe in
that coolness and you breathe out the
warmth like you breathe out that
negative energy and that technique is
actually pretty good like it literally
dissolves the emotion within you because
remember guys that the the physical
sensation that you have correlates is
somewhat equivalent to the mental
emotion right so if we reduce this then
we're going to reduce this that's just
how it works and then so we can work on
the body then the third thing that we
can do is is sort of met work on the
mind what I mean by this so therapy is a
good example of processing emotions but
you can also have like conversations
with friends you can work so like you
know this is why what we're training
recovery coaches to do so recovery
coaches you can like talk to people on
our discord just trying to think about
what's available to you guys right talk
to people on discord
and so like you can you can also do
other kinds of you know processing
activities like you can join a men's
group or a women's group I pick men
first because I think our audience is
still like 70% male you can just submit
a support group it doesn't even have to
be gender specific you know if you've
got an addiction problem then you can do
something like refuge recovery or AAA or
even if you're addicted to video games
you can do CGA a I mean they're a good
organization I don't really agree with
their methodologies but not to say that
their methodologies are wrong it's just
not what I choose to do so like you know
you can do and you can also meditate for
sure you can also do other exercises
like journaling or like writing reflects
ur sizes right so like Jordan Peterson's
self authoring program I think has a lot
of emotional processing that kind of
comes along with it I would imagine so I
don't really know too much about the
program but yeah so that there's like
this kind of stuff right so then like
like then people kind of ask how do I
deal with these emotions like this is
how you deal with them first you notice
them second you work on the body and
third you work on the mind and so let's
go ahead and take we're gonna have time
for a couple of questions okay so we're
gonna do mani Seth
Tony and Connor and we'll do two
questions okay
[Music]
it looks like we've got Connor oh hey
hey so you can give the example of Alexa
make thick there any other examples of
emotions besides that what do you mean
besides what uh one example that you
gave Alexa mythic yeah Alexa thymic yes
the next by mimic what other emotions
besides that are there if well so
alexithymia is not an emotion
alexithymia is being color blind to your
emotion yes yes sir does that here
question I think the emotions are like
fear shame anger frustration grief
regret and the problem with people who
are Alexa thymic is that they can't
detect any of them mm-hmm does that work
yeah yeah I think does that answer your
question yeah so is it so is it with
like we talking about the brain is there
like a like a different set of like that
kind of philosophy or is it just that
particular what do you mean by jet in
the brain is there a different set of
philosophy um let me think like um so
you give the example is there um let me
think Israel uh I don't know exactly
what I'm trying to say do I think okay
why don't you tell moment to compose
your thoughts sometimes it can help to
write out your question and let's move
on to someone else Connor uh yeah can
you me yep cool so lately I've been
doing trauma processing and it kind of
set off this like chain effect of like
oh boy the opposite of like lack of
emotions right and so yeah um so I kind
of got to this state of like like for
instance I went to a friend's yesterday
and had like this initial like just
shutdown of everything like I would like
tunnel vision and it was like just
automatic right it was like and yeah and
so that happens quite frequently video
games was actually like it helped quite
a bit in the kind of like reducing a lot
of the physical
actions and stuff but now I'm kind of in
this state where it's like I don't even
know like I don't feel like any emotions
or like if occasionally I'll be like in
bed at night and I'll just be super sad
but that's like the only emotion that I
can ever feel and I think like yeah so I
guess just like how to combat the or not
even combat but like that automatic
response because it's like almost like I
don't even have a choice in it it's just
like yeah you you don't you don't have a
choice in it I don't think you should
come bat it so what you're doing so
people have a history of trauma
oftentimes dissociate during the trauma
and after the trauma and dissociation is
an adaptive and protective mechanism
just like video gaming so when the
emotional when when when your garden
hose it's not even a garden hose it's a
fire hydrant when your fire hydrant is
busted open and there's water all over
the place your brain is like oh crap
let's just shut it all off they're like
pulling the plug on like all of the
emotional circuits and that's absolutely
protective and and adaptive and it's
probably because you started like
turning that on right through doing like
trauma focused work right so this is
ideally where you have an expert like a
therapist who will help you through this
because it's really hard to manage on
your own which I do yeah yeah so I think
that the issue there is that what you
want to do is like bring up emotions in
a controlled environment where you feel
safe and then like it's hard to stop a
fire hydrant on your own but if you've
got like two people working together you
may be able to manage some of those
emotions right and even as it comes to
the sadness so it sounds like you you're
you know your fire hydrant is mostly
closed up but there are some cases where
there's like water leaking out right
which is like when you're laying in bed
at night you start to start and feel a
sense of overwhelming sadness so I'd say
that all of the things that we talked
about you can do when you feel that but
I would not go like you know walking
around and opening up that fire hydrant
on your own because your bodies your
body or your mind are telling you hey
man that's too much for us right now
yeah and and there are other things like
you know going to a retreat or like
going for a hike or things like that can
also be really good at emotionally
processing it all happens kind of
subconsciously in that in the background
but you know a lot of people deal with
trauma
through like finding themselves kind of
activities right yeah I think in your
case I think you're actually on the
right Road and unfortunately part of the
process of processing that trauma like
in order to process the emotion what
we're doing is we're actually shining a
light on it so you experience it more
and then you can try to sort of explore
that sadness a little bit but be careful
I would start really with physical stuff
because physical stuff tends to be
pretty safe cool yeah I can do that for
sure
great question man good luck to you bye
thank you appreciate it I'm glad you're
seeing a therapist it's I mean you're
you know taking taking control of
yourself and taking control of your life
sometimes it's not a solo player thing I
mean solo that's all again same good
luck to you man I wish you the best
thank you
do we have Seth yep can you hear me yep
I'm okay so I just had two questions or
it's just I could ask one if you want
but uh so is there like a thing we're
over time like as a child I generally
felt I don't know if this is alexithymia
or not but like over time I felt that
emotions and just my general sensations
and feelings and experiences have lost
like like their potency almost like it
almost feels like yeah it feels like um
you know like I I guess like over time I
even would lose track of like positive
experiences because like I would be
either maybe too analytical like I would
start to notice like oh you're having a
good time you're smiling you're laughing
and then it would take away from it so
it's almost like you're you say
awareness precedes control
it's like awareness also kind of
scrutiny unless it's like a synthetic
faulty form of awareness that I'm you
know at me like my mindfulness or
something er so what is that that like
could you explain that sure so there are
two things I think that are going on one
is that like I mentioned earlier
generally speaking when we suppress
emotions we suppress all emotions right
so like what I want you to imagine that
you yourself like you have an internal
volume control for all of your emotions
in order to protect us from the bad
sounds we're gonna turn down the good
sounds to because we just we just know
how to turn down the volume mmm so what
you're describing about like over time
you've lost like a zest for life or
things seem to be less fun
for you that makes sense to me and I
have that I see that experience a lot
with video gamers and it's just because
they turn down the volume on everything
yeah and it's a dramatic sorry yeah god
it's not even dramatic either it's it's
almost subtle like it's just part of the
existence it's it's almost absolutely
right so like if you think about if if
you gradually turn down the volume on
your TV over years and you don't turn it
back up at some point it becomes normal
to have like a muted or very quiet TV
yeah like you think it's max volume
right you don't even recognize that
volume control as a thing because it's
entirely subconscious you just think
that's how the TV works
hmm I wouldn't even think that you
recognize its max volume it's just you
you don't you think that that is the
only volume that the Catena TV is
capable of it's not max or it's not low
it's just the volume of the TV period
right yeah that makes sense
right yeah so so so that's one thing
that's going on the second thing that
I'm glad you noticed is that this is
what happens when you start to develop
awareness of feelings is it creates
distance between those feelings and
those feelings have less power over you
right so there's actually a fourth
variable to the equation of intention
like you know intention to complete an
action and that's so the three variables
right now we're like rational thought
emotions an ego in the fourth one is
awareness and as awareness increases the
value of everything else goes down
relative to awareness and then when you
become perfectly enlightened then your
awareness is a hundred percent and then
your actions are can be like instantly
implemented hmm so in your case you may
actually be experiencing both that as
you gain awareness of excitement the
feeling of excitement kind or not the
feeling of excitement the impact of
excitement starts to go down which is
normal
see I think yeah like an early age I
think like say order to understand like
it was because of social like capital or
whatever like I wanted to be popular in
this and out whatever I tried to start
understanding other people through
myself so I don't know if like I taught
myself some type of mindfulness or
awareness or something this was like in
seventh grade or like middle school I
tried to start like I would witness what
made me feel insecure and then I
look inside myself to see the process
and then I would try to like
reverse-engineer it by seeing other
people and so like I started to distance
myself from like maybe social
interaction in like a weird way because
they're just breaking everything down
yeah so that's that's you stepping away
from emotional empathy and stepping
towards cognitive empathy hmm so your
understanding of emotions has become
more and more analytical which in turn
increases your colorblindness because
you can analyze your emotions but you're
not exactly sure like what you feel or
how you feel
yeah huh so I think you should continue
doing you know the mindfulness stuff and
it's okay for you to you know be mindful
towards your positive emotions and it
kind of like you and then over time as
you kind of do that sort of stuff
you can actually start to control how
much you want to feel that emotion hmm
the last thing is like when you're fully
aware you can kind of choose to jump
into the water or get back out whenever
you want to and that's when things get
fun so is the the like autonomous
process that I've created is it possible
that maybe it just kind of filters that
posit because I generally feel that it
filters out the positive ones and then
the negative ones stay so like if I'm at
a party having fun it'll take they'll
create a distance from the having fun
but it won't be I don't really create a
distance to negative things I only
create a distance to the positive you
you do create a distance to negative
things the difference is that your your
amount of positive emotion is like 10
and your amount of negative emotion is
90 oh and you're subtracting 80 from
both sides does you so it's just that
you have more negative emotion built up
which makes sense because you haven't
been processing emotion for what sounds
like years and years and years and years
because that [ __ ] is just piling up yeah
got it
yes cool thank you all right good luck
man thank you
okay mica or Tony Mike are you ready to
give it another shot I mean I think so
so um um there's no a word or phrase
that identifies certain groups of
emotions that you feel are suppressed so
whether it be on like the few or
whatever that might be so I don't think
that there are groups of emotions that
you suppress I think like I said
alexithymia turns down the volume on all
of your
emotions so I get and and so I don't
think that there's like differently it's
not like there's a different word for
like suppression of anger and shame in a
different word from some fresh thing
like happiness and excitement I think
it's just suppression oh just all of
them in general although it can't be a
specific one that you just feel like no
I mean it could be right so your brain
could have adapted to being very good at
suppressing a particular emotion mm-hmm
like it's possible right so like the guy
earlier who's talking about trauma there
are some things for example that
triggered dissociation and that
dissociative process could be triggered
by specific emotions in fact we know
that mm-hmm so like that's what the idea
of triggers so your brain can't find you
to a particular thing and I guess the
closest thing to what you're describing
is trigger would be the word that yes
yes yes sir yeah yeah so actually now
that I think about it I mean yeah but I
don't think there's a specific word for
like suppressing anger okay but your
brain can trigger dissociative or
suppressive mechanics with some emotions
around moreso than others absolutely
okay thank you
great question man Tony you around yeah
can you hear me yep so my question is is
kind of dealing with like previous
emotions so I kind of resonate a lot
with your eStore in terms of I had
struggles with college and dropped out
and like my thing was to basically
completely dissociate to the point of
like not even eating or like it was bad
but now I feel pretty good but to use
your analogy it feels like I kind of
just like leveled up past the debuff so
I still feel like I have that like yeah
like some scar there so how to deal with
that when like I feel pretty good I made
a lot of progress but it's still holding
me back yeah so I think first of all I
agree with you that it is holding you
back right so you're doing pretty well
and what I'm telling you man is like
once you cleanse that debuff you're
gonna be like an absolute beast in real
life so I think you should absolutely
work on that right just doing good in
life is not actually like what we're
shooting for where she asked for
cleansing all the debuffs and where you
end up is where you end
but like as long as the debuff so that
you should work on so question is how so
I think like I said you know there are a
lot of different things that you can do
I think therapy is a great example of
something that you can kind of talk to
someone about when you were feeling bad
and work through and process those
emotions and tell your story and things
like that
I think narrative is another good
example so you know doing narrative
exercises about like sort of just
writing about that time of your life
will probably bring things up for you
and you'll feel that emotion and then
it'll kind of affect you and then it'll
kind of like wither away yeah so the
other thing I want you guys to remember
about emotions is like you don't feel
them forever
so if I if I'm walking down the street
and then you know I get scared of a dog
I feel that dog creates a certain amount
of fear in my mind like let's say it
creates a fear of 20 and then the more I
feel that fear the more that fear kind
of goes down because our mind naturally
like you don't stay scared forever right
our mind naturally sort of processes
processes that fear we return to
equilibrium the problem is that we feel
20 we process - and then we store 18 and
the next day you're failing out of
college you feel more shame so you get
plus 20 shame you process - and then you
Bank 18 and so what you have is like you
have all this banked stuff which all you
have to do is like process it and feel
it and like you can breathe into it or
whatever I don't know if there's some
way that you can evoke it can you evoke
the feelings that you used to feel uh
it's very much like like it's completely
blanked out it's almost like I was
saying about this Saturday like I don't
even remember like like any of that and
I try not to think about it at all
instead of processing it so I probably
could but it's like it's difficult
because I don't want to feel that crap
that I felt yeah so if you're if you're
not so I would really say like in your
situation you should work with someone
mm-hmm right so that can be a coach
through us or a therapist and and it
kind of depends on on you know whether
you have a clinical diagnosis that you
want to work on or not because if you
have a clinical like diagnosis like PTSD
or trauma or things like that then
that's really something that you should
see a mental health professional about
but
yeah I mean I'd say like it's hard to do
it solo like the other thing that you
could I mean if you want to do it solo
I'd say the things that you can do you
can drive try journaling so you can just
start by writing about that part of your
life and then kind of focusing on the
feeling so what are the emotions that
you felt and then the other thing that
you can do is just continue to meditate
and do yoga and stuff like that and then
you'll start to process those emotions
on your own because remember that your
body like naturally wants to return to a
healthy state and you don't after like
if you get a cut like you don't have to
direct the healing you need bodies just
you just don't have to get in the way
and if you facilitate healing by like
you know keeping it clean and stuff like
that and just kind of practicing
positive stuff if you do yoga and
meditation for a period of two or three
years it'll clear out a lot of that crap
yeah makes it a smell yeah awesome in
thanks for your question yeah thank you
thank you for all you're doing so
alright guys so we're gonna wrap up for
today I'm sorry we don't have sort of as
formal of a meditation practice
hopefully you guys can do sort of that
breathing into the the chest or just
breathe into that part of your emotion
and a combination of you know we got a
little bit interrupted but I really do
have to run but we'll see you guys
tomorrow let's do a quick poll
what do you guys want to talk about
tomorrow
I think communication was at the top of
the list we can do I are better we can
do what else can we do with mental
health stuff so we can talk about you
know my perspective on depression or
ADHD or trauma we can do mechanism of
the mind so this is understanding like
what are the pieces of the mind or we
can talk about kovin how to manage
yourself
in communication is like how to talk to
people okay so it still looks like it's
predominately communication okay I can
get behind that all right so it looks
like it's heavily in favor of of
communication but that the mechanism of
mine IRL and mental health are evenly
split insecurity ego okay let's let's
try this again I'm just gonna knock over
it off the list and let's put you go in
there see what happens now
oh man it's close looks like egos
winning okay so we have a new winner
which is ego okay okay so we may still
do communication and the reason for that
is because I'm just thinking through
what order to do things in that kind of
so I don't want to treat things like
individual topics right I want things to
build on each other and I think talking
about emotions and then link like well I
wanted to do emotions before
communication for sure and so then the
question is is it better to do ego
before communication or communication
before ego
what's gonna be better so let me think
about that we'll definitely do those two
over the next two days it's just what
order we want to do them in
communication with people that have a
big ego right so then the question is do
you want to e go first so you want to do
communication for it will not only do
those two so thanks for coming guys let
me just think about it let me think
about how I want to structure that and
which one should come first but will
definitely hit both of those up and Alex
you keep on sending me these gigantic
messages but buddy I don't I can't read
that during a live seminar so good luck
buddy I'll try to get to it if I can so
I'll see you guys tomorrow thanks for
coming and you know I think we really
appreciate all of the donations and
stuff on on Kofi there was a question
about are we gonna continue this it just
depends so whether we continue this or
not us frankly depends on how much
people get out of it and like how many
people use it right so right now I'm
just thinking about how to spend my time
and I want to spend my time to do the
thing that helps the equation for how I
spend my time is most value for most
number people so if it's like super
super valuable like I could I could
with one person at a time and helped
them immensely over the course of six
months or I could do a webinar where I
could do a twitch stream so basically
depending on how popular this is we're
gonna prioritize it more or how
unpopular is we'll prioritize it less so
if you guys want to see more of this
than what I suggest that you do is you
tell people that you know or you talk it
up or you advertise it for it right so
we haven't asked you to do that yet and
I wasn't planning on asking for it but
I'll just let you guys know from my
perspective you know five hundred people
or six hundred people or seven hundred
people do this and four thousand people
watch our streams were more likely to
prioritize streams over this so I'm
trying to kind of figure out how to work
but if the numbers for the webinar get
higher and higher and higher then we'll
do more and more webinars because that
seems to be what what helps people so
sort of a simple mathematical equation
we have a limited resource so how should
we invest it that that people will
decide so tell your friends and then if
our numbers go up then we'll probably do
more but it at this point you know I
don't know how much longer we'll
definitely do the two weeks but then
we'll kind of reassess and maybe try
something else or maybe continue this
we'll see so take care guys